.github/instructions/plan.instructions.md, before:

---
applyTo: .rpi/projects/**/plan.md
description: Plan phase constraints for RPI workflow - enforces atomic task decomposition with verification steps
---

# Plan Phase Instructions

## Constraints

- **Must:** Produce atomic checklists with verification steps. Each task must be independently testable.
- **Must:** Reference facts from `research.md`—do not introduce assumptions not grounded in research.
- **Must:** Validate plan output against FACTS criteria (Feasible, Atomic, Clear, Testable, Scoped) before completing.
- **Must:** Include pass/fail criteria for every verification step.

## Expected Output

Produce `plan.md` in `.rpi/projects/<project-id>/plan.md` with the following sections:

1. **Strategy and Scope** - Chosen approach, why it aligns with research, what's in/out of scope.
2. **Architectural Decomposition** - High-level component breakdown (if applicable).
3. **Atomic Task List** - Checkbox list with verification steps and explicit pass/fail criteria.
4. **Verification Plan** - How will correctness be enforced (automated, manual, CI)?
5. **Validation — FACTS Criteria** - Is this plan Feasible, Atomic, Clear, Testable, Scoped?

## Task Format

Each task must follow this pattern:

```
[ ] Task N — <Descriptive name> (research.md — Section X reference)
- Action: <What to do>
- Verification: <How to verify> Pass: <success criteria> Fail: <failure criteria>
```

## Recursion

If implementation discovers the plan is impossible, implementer must halt and return to this phase for replanning.

Commit message:

Enhance RPI workflow templates and prompts with structured guidelines and validation criteria - Introduced new research and plan templates to standardize documentation. - Updated prompts to align with new templates and clarify instructions. - Revised existing documentation to reference the new templates and ensure consistency in the RPI workflow.

.github/instructions/plan.instructions.md, after:

---
applyTo: .rpi/projects/**/plan.md
description: Plan phase constraints for RPI workflow - enforces atomic task decomposition with verification steps
---

# Plan Phase Instructions

## Constraints

- **Must:** Produce atomic checklists with verification steps. Each task must be independently testable.
- **Must:** Reference facts from `research.md`—do not introduce assumptions not grounded in research.
- **Must:** Validate plan output against FACTS criteria (Feasible, Atomic, Clear, Testable, Scoped) before completing.
- **Must:** Include pass/fail criteria for every verification step.
- **Must:** Use `.github/skills/rpi-workflow/resources/plan-template.md` as the starting structure.

## Expected Output

Produce `plan.md` in `.rpi/projects/<project-id>/plan.md` with the following sections:

1. **Strategy and Scope** - Must include Approach, Trade-offs, Safe State, In Scope, and Out of Scope.
2. **Architectural Decomposition** - High-level component breakdown (if applicable).
3. **Atomic Task List** - Checkbox list with verification steps and explicit pass/fail criteria.
4. **Verification Plan** - How will correctness be enforced (automated, manual, CI)?
5. **Validation — FACTS Criteria** - Is this plan Feasible, Atomic, Clear, Testable, Scoped?

## Task Format

Each task must follow this pattern:

```
[ ] Task N — <Descriptive name> (research.md — Section X reference)
- Action: <What to do>
- Verification: <How to verify> Pass: <success criteria> Fail: <failure criteria>
```

## Recursion

If implementation discovers the plan is impossible, implementer must halt and return to this phase for replanning.
