.github/instructions/research.instructions.md, before:

---
applyTo: .rpi/projects/**/research.md
description: Research phase constraints for RPI workflow - enforces read-only discovery with mandatory citations
---

# Research Phase Instructions

## Constraints

- **Must:** Do not propose solutions; cite sources for all factual claims.
- **Must:** Follow read-only exploration—discovery only, no implementation planning.
- **Must:** Validate research output against FAR criteria (Factual, Actionable, Relevant) before completing.
- **Must:** Document all unknowns explicitly in a "Notes on Unknowns" section.

## Expected Output

Produce `research.md` in `.rpi/projects/<project-id>/research.md` with the following sections:

1. **Problem Statement Analysis** - What is being investigated and why?
2. **Conceptual Scope** - What concepts, systems, or APIs are involved?
3. **System Constraints** - What limitations or requirements must be respected?
4. **Existing Patterns and Exemplars** - What prior art or examples exist?
5. **Validation — FAR Criteria** - Is this research Factual, Actionable, Relevant?
6. **Notes on Unknowns** - What remains uncertain or requires runtime assumptions?

## Citation Style

Use inline parenthetical references: (source.md — Section X) or (documentation URL).

Commit message:

Enhance RPI workflow templates and prompts with structured guidelines and validation criteria - Introduced new research and plan templates to standardize documentation. - Updated prompts to align with new templates and clarify instructions. - Revised existing documentation to reference the new templates and ensure consistency in the RPI workflow.

.github/instructions/research.instructions.md, after:

---
applyTo: .rpi/projects/**/research.md
description: Research phase constraints for RPI workflow - enforces read-only discovery with mandatory citations
---

# Research Phase Instructions

## Constraints

- **Must:** Do not propose solutions; cite sources for all factual claims.
- **Must:** Follow read-only exploration—discovery only, no implementation planning.
- **Must:** Validate research output against FAR criteria (Factual, Actionable, Relevant) before completing.
- **Must:** Document all unknowns explicitly in a "Notes on Unknowns" section.
- **Must:** Use `.github/skills/rpi-workflow/resources/research-template.md` as the starting structure.

## Expected Output

Produce `research.md` in `.rpi/projects/<project-id>/research.md` with the following sections:

1. **`## 1) Problem Statement Analysis`** - What is being investigated and why?
2. **`## 2) Code Archaeology / Blast Radius`** - What entry points, core logic, and data models are impacted?
3. **`## 3) Conceptual Scope`** - What concepts, systems, or APIs are involved?
4. **`## 4) System Constraints`** - What limitations or requirements must be respected?
5. **`## 5) Existing Patterns and Exemplars`** - What prior art or examples exist?
6. **`## 6) Validation - FAR Criteria`** - Is this research Factual, Actionable, Relevant?
7. **`## 7) Notes on Unknowns`** - What remains uncertain or requires runtime assumptions?

## Citation Style

Use inline parenthetical references: (source.md — Section X) or (documentation URL).
