.github/skills/rpi-workflow/SKILL.md, before:

---
name: rpi-workflow
description: Assist with Research → Plan → Implement workflow by providing templates, validation guidance, and phase transition helpers for systematic software development.
---

# RPI Workflow Skill

This skill helps agents and operators navigate the Research → Plan → Implement (RPI) pattern for systematic software development.

## Usage

Invoke this skill when:

- **Starting a new RPI project** - Need templates and structure for research/plan artifacts.
- **Transitioning between phases** - Ensuring proper handoff criteria are met.
- **Validating artifacts** - Checking research.md against FAR criteria or plan.md against FACTS criteria.
- **Understanding phase constraints** - Learning what's allowed/forbidden in each phase.

### Phase-Specific Guidance

**Research Phase:**
- Produce `.rpi/projects/<project-id>/research.md` following the template.
- Maintain read-only posture—no solution proposals.
- Cite all sources inline (e.g., `source.md — Section 2`).
- Validate against FAR: Factual, Actionable, Relevant.

**Plan Phase:**
- Produce `.rpi/projects/<project-id>/plan.md` following the template.
- Reference facts from `research.md`—no unsupported assumptions.
- Decompose into atomic tasks with pass/fail verification.
- Validate against FACTS: Feasible, Atomic, Clear, Testable, Scoped.

**Implement Phase:**
- Execute tasks from `plan.md` sequentially.
- Mark tasks complete only after verification passes.
- Halt and recurse to Plan if task is impossible.
- Create `.rpi/projects/<project-id>/SIGNOFF` when all tasks complete.

## Scripts

### RPI Project Scaffolder

Location: `.github/skills/rpi-workflow/scripts/rpi-new.sh`

Creates a new RPI project directory structure with a date prefix (yyyymmdd).

**Usage:**
```bash
bash .github/skills/rpi-workflow/scripts/rpi-new.sh "Project Title"
```

**What it does:**
- Validates `.rpi/` directory exists in repository root
- Calculates a date prefix (e.g., `20260213`)
- Creates `.rpi/projects/yyyymmdd-project-slug/research.md` with standard template
- Generates URL-friendly slug from project title

**Dependencies:**
- Bash shell (standard on macOS/Linux)
- No Node.js or package manager dependencies

**Example:**
```bash
# Creates .rpi/projects/20260213-authentication-refactor/research.md
bash .github/skills/rpi-workflow/scripts/rpi-new.sh "Authentication Refactor"
```

## Project Reuse Policy

> **Every session starts with a new project folder.** Never reuse an existing `.rpi/projects/` folder unless the operator explicitly authorizes it.

### Rules

1. **Pre-flight scan:** Before writing any artifact, list `.rpi/projects/` and check for folders with a similar slug.
2. **Match found — stop and report:** If a potentially related folder is found, report:
   - Folder name and date prefix
   - Which artifacts exist (`research.md`, `plan.md`, `SIGNOFF`)
   - Whether the project is finalized (has `SIGNOFF`)
   Then **stop and wait** for operator instruction.
3. **Reuse requires explicit authorization:** The operator must say `reuse project <project-id>` or `continue project <project-id>`. Vague similarity is never enough.
4. **Fresh start:** If the operator wants a new session on the same topic, direct them to run the scaffolder to create a new dated folder. Do not write to the old folder.
5. **Never overwrite silently:** Even when reuse is authorized, do not overwrite an artifact without stating which file will be modified and receiving confirmation.

### When Reuse Is Authorized

If the operator explicitly says to reuse a project:
- Confirm which artifacts may be modified (e.g., "updating `plan.md` only").
- Read the existing artifacts first before writing.
- Preserve any content the operator has not asked to change.

## Resources

- [Research Template](resources/research-template.md) - Boilerplate structure for research.md files.
- [Plan Template](resources/plan-template.md) - Boilerplate structure for plan.md files.
- [Prompt Examples](resources/prompts/plan-example.md) - Sample prompts for phase transitions.
- [Validation Guide](resources/validation/README.md) - How to check FAR and FACTS criteria.

## Technical Notes

This skill works with:
- **Global instructions:** `.github/copilot-instructions.md` (RPI constitution)
- **Scoped instructions:** `.github/instructions/*.instructions.md` (phase-specific constraints)
- **Governance:** `AGENTS.md` (role definitions and handoff rules)
- **Prompt entry points:** `.github/prompts/*.prompt.md` (operator UX helpers)

All artifacts are repository-backed and validated by CI (`.github/workflows/rpi-validate.yml`).

Commit message:

Enhance RPI workflow governance by enforcing strict artifact boundaries for research and planning phases. Updated documentation to clarify that only designated files may be created or modified, preventing critical phase violations. Adjusted validation scripts and installation processes to reflect these governance changes.

.github/skills/rpi-workflow/SKILL.md, after:

---
name: rpi-workflow
description: Assist with Research → Plan → Implement workflow by providing templates, validation guidance, and phase transition helpers for systematic software development.
---

# RPI Workflow Skill

This skill helps agents and operators navigate the Research → Plan → Implement (RPI) pattern for systematic software development.

## Usage

Invoke this skill when:

- **Starting a new RPI project** - Need templates and structure for research/plan artifacts.
- **Transitioning between phases** - Ensuring proper handoff criteria are met.
- **Validating artifacts** - Checking research.md against FAR criteria or plan.md against FACTS criteria.
- **Understanding phase constraints** - Learning what's allowed/forbidden in each phase.

### Phase-Specific Guidance

**Research Phase:**
- Produce `.rpi/projects/<project-id>/research.md` following the template.
- Maintain read-only posture—no solution proposals.
- Cite all sources inline (e.g., `source.md — Section 2`).
- Validate against FAR: Factual, Actionable, Relevant.
- **You MUST NOT create or modify any file other than `research.md`. Producing any additional artifact—markdown, draft, note, checklist, or implementation file—is a critical phase violation. Stop immediately and report to the operator.**

**Plan Phase:**
- Produce `.rpi/projects/<project-id>/plan.md` following the template.
- Reference facts from `research.md`—no unsupported assumptions.
- Decompose into atomic tasks with pass/fail verification.
- Validate against FACTS: Feasible, Atomic, Clear, Testable, Scoped.
- **You MUST NOT create or modify any file other than `plan.md`. Producing any additional artifact is a critical phase violation. Stop immediately and report to the operator.**

**Implement Phase:**
- Execute tasks from `plan.md` sequentially.
- Mark tasks complete only after verification passes.
- Halt and recurse to Plan if task is impossible.
- Create `.rpi/projects/<project-id>/SIGNOFF` when all tasks complete.

## Scripts

### RPI Project Scaffolder

Location: `.github/skills/rpi-workflow/scripts/rpi-new.sh`

Creates a new RPI project directory structure with a date prefix (yyyymmdd).

**Usage:**
```bash
bash .github/skills/rpi-workflow/scripts/rpi-new.sh "Project Title"
```

**What it does:**
- Validates `.rpi/` directory exists in repository root
- Calculates a date prefix (e.g., `20260213`)
- Creates `.rpi/projects/yyyymmdd-project-slug/research.md` with standard template
- Generates URL-friendly slug from project title

**Dependencies:**
- Bash shell (standard on macOS/Linux)
- No Node.js or package manager dependencies

**Example:**
```bash
# Creates .rpi/projects/20260213-authentication-refactor/research.md
bash .github/skills/rpi-workflow/scripts/rpi-new.sh "Authentication Refactor"
```

## Project Reuse Policy

> **Every session starts with a new project folder.** Never reuse an existing `.rpi/projects/` folder unless the operator explicitly authorizes it.

### Rules

1. **Pre-flight scan:** Before writing any artifact, list `.rpi/projects/` and check for folders with a similar slug.
2. **Match found — stop and report:** If a potentially related folder is found, report:
   - Folder name and date prefix
   - Which artifacts exist (`research.md`, `plan.md`, `SIGNOFF`)
   - Whether the project is finalized (has `SIGNOFF`)
   Then **stop and wait** for operator instruction.
3. **Reuse requires explicit authorization:** The operator must say `reuse project <project-id>` or `continue project <project-id>`. Vague similarity is never enough.
4. **Fresh start:** If the operator wants a new session on the same topic, direct them to run the scaffolder to create a new dated folder. Do not write to the old folder.
5. **Never overwrite silently:** Even when reuse is authorized, do not overwrite an artifact without stating which file will be modified and receiving confirmation.

### When Reuse Is Authorized

If the operator explicitly says to reuse a project:
- Confirm which artifacts may be modified (e.g., "updating `plan.md` only").
- Read the existing artifacts first before writing.
- Preserve any content the operator has not asked to change.

## Resources

- [Research Template](resources/research-template.md) - Boilerplate structure for research.md files.
- [Plan Template](resources/plan-template.md) - Boilerplate structure for plan.md files.
- [Prompt Examples](resources/prompts/plan-example.md) - Sample prompts for phase transitions.
- [Validation Guide](resources/validation/README.md) - How to check FAR and FACTS criteria.

## Technical Notes

This skill works with:
- **Global instructions:** `.github/copilot-instructions.md` (RPI constitution)
- **Scoped instructions:** `.github/instructions/*.instructions.md` (phase-specific constraints)
- **Governance:** `AGENTS.md` (role definitions and handoff rules)
- **Prompt entry points:** `.github/prompts/*.prompt.md` (operator UX helpers)

All artifacts are repository-backed and validated by CI (`.github/workflows/rpi-validate.yml`).
